Draft CIP - Delegateless Automation (#55)
global-synchronizer-foundation/cips: cip-0064/cip-0064.md

## CIP 0064

<pre>
 CIP: CIP 0064
 Title: Delegateless Automation
 Author: Julien Tinguely
 Comments-Summary: No comments yet
 Status: Draft
 Type: Standards Track
 Created: 2025-04-21
 Approved: N/A
 License: CC0-1.0
</pre>

## Abstract

This CIP proposes to replace the elected SV delegate mechanism, to improve fault tolerance and more fully automate decentralized operations.  

> Instead of relying on a single delegate, we propose an approach where the backend automation for each instance of the Super Validator application, (one instance operating on each of the different Super Validator nodes), attempts to exercise delegate choices. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of relying on a single delegate, we propose an approach where the backend automation for each instance of the Super Validator application, (one instance operating on each of the different Super Validator nodes), attempts to submit actions that have reached the 2/3 voting threshold. 
```

> Instead of relying on a single delegate, we propose an approach where the backend automation for each instance of the Super Validator application, (one instance operating on each of the different Super Validator nodes), attempts to submit actions that have reached the 2/3 voting threshold in favor. 
> Each application will apply a random delay, tuned to minimize contention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of relying on a single delegate, we propose an approach where the backend automation for each instance of the Super Validator application, (one instance operating on each of the different Super Validator nodes), attempts to submit actions that the DSO has been authorized to perform.  
Each application will apply a random delay, tuned to minimize contention.
```

## Specification

### Daml

In the new implementation, all current choices on the `DsoRules` template having `dsoDelegate` as controller will introduce
a new optional argument named `sv` to be used instead. This allows all SVs to exercise the choice by specifying their own party.
Daml will reject, with an authorization error, any transaction where the SV application tries to specify any party other than its own.

### SV Application

The SV application is modified such that all SVs attempt to submit the commands currently only being submitted by the delegate.

> This introduces some potential for conflict: if multiple SV applications submit the same transaction at the same time, 
> for example, all attempt to advance the mining rounds at the same time, only one of them will succeed and the others fail, that is,
> they contend with each other. Importantly, this is not a correctness issue: The Daml code already handles this case; for example, it can successfully manage if the delegate crashes during a submission and tries to resubmit the same command. But the failed transactions introduce unnecessary load on the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This introduces some potential for conflict: if multiple SV applications submit the same transaction at the same time-- 
for example, if all attempt to advance the mining rounds at the same time--only one of them will succeed, and the others will fail; that is,
they will contend with each other. Importantly, this is not a correctness issue: The Daml code already handles this case; for example, it can successfully manage if the delegate crashes during a submission and tries to resubmit the same command. But the failed transactions would introduce unnecessary load on the network.
```

To minimize contention, each instance of the decentralized SV application introduces a random delay before attempting a task, and uses a retry mechanism with randomized backoff.
To ensure that these delays are evenly distributed, scalable with the number of SVs, and remain within the polling interval, the delays are sampled from a uniform distribution:
`Uniform(0, max(n * expectedTaskDuration, pollingInterval))`, where:
- `n` is the number of SVs,
- `expectedTaskDuration` is the estimated duration of a command execution (default: 5 seconds), and
- `pollingInterval` is the interval between polling trigger calls (default: 30 seconds).

The retry mechanism uses exponential backoff (the delay doubles each time) with an initial delay of `expectedTaskDuration`, with a maximum backoff delay capped at `2 * expectedTaskDuration`.

> The `expectedTaskDuration` value is configurable via the Helm chart, allowing adjustments if needed.

Reviewer: Any reason (other than time) to not manage this value as part of the DSO configuration?

Reviewer: @julientinguely-da ^^

After the delay has passed, the SV application either succeeds submitting the command, fails because of contention or realises the command has already been submitted by another SV.
Each automation trigger already includes a staleness check to determine if the associated task has already been completed or archived. 

A new metric named `splice_trigger_attempted_total` is added to monitor trigger failures caused by contention and help in choosing good delay and backoff parameters.

### SV UI

In the current implementation, there is a dedicated page in the SV UI used to elect a new delegate for the next round, 

> intended to unlock the system if a delegate comes down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intended to unlock the system if a delegate goes down.
```

In the new implementation, delegate election and its dedicated page in the SV UI are fully removed and 
associated Daml choices cannot be executed anymore.

## Motivation

A delegate performs critical network-related tasks, such as for example advancing mining rounds or triggering vote proposal executions when the required 2/3 voting thresholds is reached.
In the current version, there is no automatic fault tolerance to mitigate issues that may occur on the node. 
SVs can vote on a new delegate, but this is a manual process, and the single point of failure is just moved to a different SV.
A concrete problem is rounds stop progressing when the delegate is down.
This has been observed multiple times on devnet and testnet and highlights the need for a better fault tolerance mechanism.

## Rationale

> All SV applications attempting to complete tasks provides the right fault tolerance guarantees and introduces no correctness issues as commands are already all idempotent. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the proposed solution, all SV application instances cooperate to provide good fault tolerance guarantees as they attempt to complete tasks. The proposed solution introduces no correctness issues, as commands are already all idempotent. 
```
